<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_247"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appD"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">D</span><br/> Bit Depth</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">Computers store information electronically in the form of a number that at the simplest level can either be 0 or 1. This is called one “bit.” An 8-bit number in a computer has eight digits and is called a “byte.” So, an example of a bit is 0 and a byte is 0000 0000.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Here is how bit depth is notated in digital photography: 8-bit images have a bit depth of 256 levels because if you multiply the number 2 by itself eight times the result is 256 (2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256).</p>
<p class="text_indent">By this same logic, 12-bit images have a bit depth of 4,096 levels per pixel, and 16-bit images have a bit depth of 65,536 levels per pixel.<sup><a href="appD.xhtml#fn1" id="bck_fn1">*</a></sup> Also, in Adobe Photoshop, for technical reasons, 16-bit images have only 32,769 pixel levels instead of the 65,536 you would expect.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The visual information in digital images is organized into channels that hold all the data of either black-and-white tones or gray or each of the three primary colors of red, green, or blue (RGB). It’s interesting to consider how many actual colors this translates into. As noted earlier, an 8-bit black-and-white image has only one channel that’s called “gray,” so there are only 256 tones available.</p>
<p class="text_indent">An 8-bit RGB color image has three channels with 256 pixel levels each, so this adds up to 16,777,216 color possibilities (256 × 256 × 256). You would think that over 16 million colors would be more than enough when you consider that the human eye can perceive only about 17 million different colors. But, as you saw in <a href="Ch010.xhtml">Chapter 10</a>, pixel colors get lost in the process of editing and the translation from one color space to another. So, to provide leeway to cover this potential loss, scanners can provide 16 bits per channel, which adds up to 281 trillion color numbers!</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_248"/>One important consideration related to bit depth is that JPEG images are only 8-bit, but if you shoot your images in your camera’s raw format, the images will have 12 bits per channel. Because 12-bit image files have 16 times more pixel tonal levels than 8-bit JPEG files, when digital photographers choose the JPEG format for their work, they are essentially wasting thousands of tonal levels that would otherwise be available to work with.</p>
<p class="text_indent">For this reason, unless you are sure that you’ll never need to make large or high-quality prints of your image, you should observe the following rule:
</p>
<div class="quotes">
<p class="text_noindent bold">Always set your camera to raw (the high bit format) when you shoot.</p>
</div>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<div id="box_65b">
<p class="text_noindent gr">[<span class="bold">note</span>] Not all digital cameras offer the option to shoot in raw format. This is a good reason to carefully check the camera’s specifications before making a purchase.</p>
</div>
<p class="text_indent">One of the practical reasons not to shoot raw would be that JPEG images use less memory on your storage media, so you can capture more images per disk or card.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Also, raw images have to be converted to one of the viewable and editable formats such as .jpgf or .psd before you can work with them in Photoshop, and this takes some time and knowledge. Still, the gain in quality is usually well worth the effort of buying a larger storage card and learning how to use the conversion software.</p>
<h2>Note</h2>
<p class="footnote"><a href="appD.xhtml#bck_fn1" id="fn1">*</a> Two issues of terminology that can be confusing are that JPEG color images that actually have only 8 bits per channel are sometimes referred to as “24-bit images” because the three separate eight channels add up to 24. These are still only 8-bit images because each channel has only 256 pixels levels.</p>
</body>
</html>