<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_278"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appH"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">H</span><br/> Films, Developers, and Processing</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">With the digital revolution in full swing, it feels almost nostalgic to be writing about films and developers. But the fact remains that there are still many photographers for whom silver-based processes are the absolute standard for quality and the work they produce can be exquisite. A good example of the persistence of classic black-and-white photography is the reemergence of Rodinal, albeit with a new name, Adonal. In 2006, at the writing of the previous edition, I included a memoriam to the passing of this remarkable developer. Since then, in 2008, there was enough demand for its unique qualities that its formula has been revived, so I can once again recommend its use.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Despite what advertising may suggest, no film or developer is ideal for every use. Developers and films all have very specific qualities that are best suited to particular applications. Your goal should be to define the kind of photography that you intend to do and decide on the appropriate materials.</p>
<p class="text_indent">As you begin this process, it’s easy to feel that you may never learn enough about all the various developers and films available and their effects. There is, in fact, a much more direct and practical way to approach this problem. What most photographers actually do is look at the work of a photographer they admire and use the film and developer that photographer uses, at least as a starting point for their own work. This approach not only gives you a concrete model to follow, but also enables you to learn the pitfalls and limitations of a particular film/developer combination.</p>
<p class="text_indent">It is for this reason that I have decided to give you as much practical information as I can about what different films and developers will do. Of course, not every available film and developer is included in this appendix, but the ones I have chosen cover most of the major products available in the United States and, more important, all the major categories of films and developers that are made. As I mentioned at the beginning of <a href="Ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>, there have recently been significant changes to a number of the most revered traditional photographic products. Comments on some of these issues are included in the following sections.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_279"/>The first section here, “The Basics,” describes the general categories of films and their uses. If you’re already familiar with these basic concepts, skip this section and refer to the sections “Developer Notes,” “Film Notes,” and “Processing Notes” for more detailed information. The section “Film and Developer: Questions and Answers” in <a href="Ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a> summarizes my personal evaluations of how certain films and developers actually perform.</p>
<p class="text_indent">After you have chosen a given developer and film, stick with them until you’re sure that you understand their advantages and disadvantages; only then should you begin experimenting with different variations. In the end, you will find that the simpler your tools and methods, the easier it will be for you to accomplish your photographic goals.</p>
<div id="secappH_1">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appH_secappH_1"><span class="br1">The Basics</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">Both films and developers fall into natural categories that make it easier to decide which combination is best for you.</p>
<div id="secappH_1_1">
<h3>Films</h3>
<p class="text_noindent">There are three basic categories of films. They depend on the quality of the grain that appears when the negative is enlarged and the speed or sensitivity of the film to light. (If you aren’t familiar with the relationship between ASA and image quality, refer to <a href="appQ.xhtml">Appendix Q</a> and <a href="appG.xhtml">Appendix G</a> for its primer on basic photography. See a later section in this appendix for a discussion of tabular grain films: T-Max and Delta.)</p>
<div id="secappH_1_1_1">
<div id="secappH_1_1_1_1">
<h5>Fine-Grain Films</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">If you’re shooting well-lit landscapes, still lifes, or non-candid portraits with roll film, you will probably want to use a tripod and a relatively slow-speed, high-acutance fine-grain film such as Kodak T-Max 100, Ilford Delta 100, or Ilford Pan-F Plus. (Keep in mind that these recommendations are only guidelines for general use. The rule is: Anything that works in art is fair.) Slower films tend to have finer grain and more inherent contrast than films with higher ASA numbers. This is why, in situations where film speed isn’t a factor, most photographers try to use as slow a film as possible.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappH_1_1_1_2">
<h5>High-Speed Films</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">If you’re shooting in low-light situations or taking pictures of moving subjects, you’ll need a faster film such as Kodak Tri-X 400TX, TMY 400TMax, Ilford Delta 400, or Ilford HP5 Plus. Highspeed films have more grain and less inherent contrast than films with lower ASA numbers. Those shooting with view cameras should remember that fast films such as Tri-X 400TX are grainy only when the negative is greatly enlarged. In extreme low-light level situations where maximum film speed is the priority, films such as Kodak T-Max P3200 TMZ are ideal.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappH_1_1_1_3">
<h5>Medium-Speed Films</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">Medium-speed, semi-fine-grain films are designed for average situations where a high-speed or fine-grain film isn’t required. Kodak Plus-X 125PX and Ilford FP4 Plus are good choices.</p>
<p class="text_indent">All these films are excellent when handled properly.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div id="secappH_1_2">
<h5><a id="page_280"/>Developers</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">The speed and grain characteristics of various films make choosing the right one fairly simple. Selecting the best developer is more complex for two basic reasons: There are dozens of good brands and different types of developers to choose from, and there is a general lack of objective information about what a particular developer will do. A good general rule is: Find a photographer whose work you admire and use the developer that photographer uses.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Generally, developers fall into three basic categories: fine-grain, general-purpose, and exotic.</p>
<div id="secappH_1_2_1">
<div id="secappH_1_2_1_1">
<h5>Fine-Grain</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">Fine-grain developers are ideal for negatives that need to be greatly enlarged. Unfortunately, these developers tend to produce negatives that appear less sharp. They also give you less film speed than standard developers. Some recommended fine-grain developers are Acufine, Ilford Perceptol, and Microphen.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappH_1_2_1_2">
<h5>General-Purpose</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">Standard developers are excellent for most films and ordinary lighting situations. The slightly increased grain that you get with these formulas is only a problem if you are making very large prints. Kodak’s HC-110, Ilford’s Ilfotec HC, and Kodak’s T-Max developers have the added advantage of being concentrated liquids. Using liquids eliminates having to dissolve powders in heated water before using them. Recommended standard developers: Kodak XTOL, Kodak HC-110, Kodak D-76, Ilford ID-11, and Kodak T-Max and T-Max RS.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappH_1_2_1_3">
<h5>Exotic, Make-It-Yourself Formulas</h5>
<p class="text_noindent">Exotic developers are for adventuresome photographers looking for the ultimate developer for special purposes. The variety of different formulas available is staggering. (For more information, consult <span class="italic">Basic Photographic Materials and Processes</span>, second edition (Kindle edition), published by Focal Press; <span class="italic">The Negative,</span> by Ansel Adams; or <span class="italic">The Photo-Lab Index</span> (the last edition of this classic was published in 1994, but it’s worth having if you can find a used copy).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div id="secappH_2">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appH_secappH_2"><span class="br1">Developer Notes</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent"><span class="bold">KODAK XTOL</span> is a powder that comes in two parts that can be mixed at room temperature. Designed as a general-purpose developer, it gives very good film speed, fine grain, and good contrast. Be sure to mix XTOL precisely as recommended by Kodak and, although I suggest using this as a one-shot developer, it can be “self-replenishing.” (See note below.)</p>
<div id="box_68b">
<p class="text_noindent gr">[<span class="bold">note</span>] All developers exhaust themselves as they are used due to the accumulation of residual byproducts as you process film. Some are designed to be “one-shot” developers that you discard after using them once. This quality guarantees that you’re always using fresh developer, which is vital for consistent results, but this is clearly not the most economical or ecological darkroom practice. For this reason, many photographers and photo labs use developers that can be “replenished,” which means that they can be brought back to full strength by adding a carefully measured amount of a special, concentrated batch of the same developer brand. <a id="page_281"/>“Self-replenishing” developers like Kodak’s T-Max and XTOL have the advantage of allowing you to replenish them with a batch of developer mixed to the same dilution as your normal solution. You do this by simply bringing the volume of developer back to your normal amount, usually one-half or one full gallon.</p>
</div>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Kodak D-76</span> is a general-purpose developer sold as a powder. It can be used either straight, as a stock solution (diluted from powder), or diluted one part stock to one part water. D-76 gives slightly finer grain and can be replenished when used straight.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Ilford ID-11</span> is very similar to D-76 but gives finer grain and is good for Expansion developments.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Kodak HC-110</span> is an excellent all-purpose developer that comes in liquid form, which makes it quick and easy to use. HC-110 works well with Kodak T-Max P3200, giving good film speed and contrast. Kodak lists a number of dilution possibilities for HC-110 on the bottle. Dilution B is one part stock solution to seven parts water (1:31 from concentrate).</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Ilford Ilfotec HC</span> (High Concentrate) is a liquid developer similar to Kodak’s HC-110, although my tests show that it gives slightly less film speed.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Ilford Perceptol</span> is a softer-working, fine-grain developer that is useful for Contraction developments because of its relatively long Normal Development Times.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Kodak T-Max</span> is an excellent and versatile high-energy developer designed specifically for Kodak’s T-Max films. T-Max gives good contrast and film speed with any film, but it is especially good with T-Max 100 and 400 when used at 75 degrees. T-Max developer comes in a liquid stock solution that is mixed 1:4 for a working solution.</p>
<div id="box_69b">
<p class="text_noindent gr">[<span class="bold">note</span>] Kodak T-Max developer isn’t recommended for use with any sheet film. Occasionally, a dark, blotchy coating called “dichroic fog” will appear on the emulsion side of your film and can be removed only by vigorously washing the film by hand, which carries the risk of scratching the image. Because roll films don’t use the same adhesive coatings as sheet film between the emulsion and the film base, dichroic fog isn’t a problem when T-Max developer is used with roll films.</p>
</div>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Kodak T-Max RS</span> developer is very similar in quality to T-Max developer except that it produces negatives with slightly more contrast.</p>
<p class="text_indent">T-Max RS is formulated to be self-replenishing. (See the previous note about self-replenishing developers.) Kodak recommends replenishing at a rate of 1 1/2 ounces per roll processed. This system is easy to use and has the advantage of making it impossible to over-replenish. When the second half gallon is finished, you can assume that the developer is exhausted and ready to be replaced.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Unlike T-Max developer, T-Max RS developer is recommended for sheet film because it is designed for use in machines and contains buffers that prevent the silver from replating on the surface.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappH_3">
<p class="text_noindent"><a id="page_282"/></p>
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appH_secappH_3"><span class="br1">Film Notes</span></a></h2>
<div id="secappH_3_1">
<h3>The Old Versus New Kodak Film Controversy</h3>
<p class="text_noindent">As I mentioned at the beginning of <a href="Ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>, there has been a great deal of confusion and some controversy about the extent to which Kodak’s films have changed. What is clear is that Kodak’s emulsions needed to be modified to accommodate the relocation of the plants they use to apply the emulsions to their film bases (or the “coating alleys,” as they are known). Many photographers have discovered that prints made from these new films have more pronounced grain and harsher tonal gradations than the old films, and empirical tests have confirmed these results. For reasons that aren’t clear, this effect seems more dramatic when the new Kodak films are processed in Kodak D-76, a developer that was once the standard for many photographers. Our tests indicated that these new films have much better speed and contrast characteristics when processed in Kodak XTOL and T-Max developers. This is especially true for Kodak’s 100Tmax (T-Max 100) and 400Tmax (T-Max 400) films.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappH_3_2">
<h3>Tabular Grain Films: T-Max and Delta</h3>
<p class="text_noindent">By applying Tabular Grain or T-Grain technology to black-and-white emulsions, Kodak and Ilford have produced films that have substantially less grain than standard emulsion films. “Tabular” refers to the much larger and flatter shape of the silver crystals in the emulsions of these films. The greater light absorption qualities of these flat crystals allow the manufacturer to produce a thinner emulsion that results in substantially finer grain.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Kodak’s T-Grain films are T-Max P3200, 400Tmax, and 100Tmax. Ilford’s T-Grain films are Delta 100 and Delta 400. The finer grain and excellent image quality of these films will no doubt make them very popular with serious photographers, but my test results indicate that T-Max and Delta have unusual characteristics that should be given special attention.</p>
<ol>
<li>
<p class="text_noindent">I found 400Tmax and 100Tmax and Delta 400 and 100 to be no faster than 400TX (Tri-X) or 125PX (Plus-X), respectively. The advantage of T-Grain films is that they have substantially finer grain. The 100Tmax film has grain as fine as the old Kodak film Panatomic-X, but 100Tmax is much faster.</p>
<p class="text_indent">T-Grain films are also extremely unforgiving of underexposure. The 400Tmax and 100Tmax look best when developed in T-Max or T-Max RS developer at 75 degrees, but be sure that you place your Important Shadow Area no lower than Zone III on the scale.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Never use T-Max developer with sheet film. (See the information on Kodak T-Max under the section “Developer Notes.”)</p>
</li>
<li>T-Grain films are extremely sensitive to changes in development time, temperature, dilution, and agitation rate. Inconsistencies in any of these variables will produce noticeable changes in the contrast of your negatives. For this reason, T-Max films are very useful for Expansion and Contraction developments. Make an effort to be as consistent as possible in your development procedures.</li>
<li>Because T-Grain films are unusually responsive to changes in development time, the normal Expansion and Contraction formulas don’t apply to these films. (See the section “Expansion and Contraction Development Times” at the end of <a href="Ch08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a> for details.)</li>
<li><a id="page_283"/>Kodak indicates that T-Max films require less compensation for the reciprocity effect than do conventional films. Ordinarily, when your indicated exposure is 10 seconds, a 50-second exposure is required, with a 20 percent reduction in your development time to avoid underexposure and overdevelopment. With T-Max, Kodak recommends an exposure of only 15 seconds for a 10-second indicated exposure, with no reduction of your development time (see <a href="appR.xhtml">Appendix R</a>). Standard reciprocity failure charts apply to Ilford’s Delta films.</li>
<li>Longer fixing and washing times are required with T-Max films to clear special dyes added to the emulsion. These dyes will turn the fixer red and exhaust it faster than normal. Ilford’s “Core-Shell Crystal Technology” allows Delta 400 and 100 to have the advantages of a T-Grain emulsion without the special dyes that cause T-Max films to stain the fixing bath.</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div id="secappH_3_3">
<h3>Chromogenic Films</h3>
<p class="text_noindent">The chromogenic class of films is based on C-41 color negative developing processes. These films have characteristics that are substantially different from normal black-and-white materials. As of this writing, Ilford’s XP2 Super Black and White is the only remaining chromogenic film available.</p>
<ol>
<li>Because the images in a chromogenic negative are made up of densities of black-colored dye instead of particles of silver, they are less grainy.</li>
<li>Overexposure tends to reduce the appearance of grain because as the density of the negative increases, the microscopic spots of dye merge to form a continuous image. This allows a great range of exposure latitude when working with these films; usually ASAs between 25 and 1600 can be used on the same roll with satisfactory results.</li>
<li>Because chromogenic films must be processed to C-41 color standards, you can’t alter the development time to compensate for changes in subject contrast.</li>
<li>Because chromogenic films are designed to be printed on color papers, you’ll need much longer times and higher contrast settings when used on black-and-white papers.</li>
</ol>
</div>
</div>
<div id="secappH_4">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appH_secappH_4"><span class="br1">Processing Notes</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">A number of factors will affect your development time. Please keep the following in mind.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Agitation.</span> The longer and more aggressively you agitate the film in the developer, the shorter your development time will be. Consistency is very important. My agitation plan for roll film is as follows:
</p>
<ul class="bullet">
<li>Constant agitation for the first 30 seconds.</li>
<li>Rest for 30 seconds.</li>
<li>Agitate 5 seconds for every 30 seconds up to the total development time. (See <a href="appG.xhtml">Appendix G</a> for a primer on basic photography.)</li>
</ul>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Dilution of the Developer.</span> It’s extremely important that you accurately measure your chemistry every time you process your film. Changing the dilution has a dramatic effect on the contrast of your negatives. Very dilute developers reduce negative contrast. Higher concentrations increase contrast. (See <a href="appM.xhtml">Appendix M</a>.)</p>
<div id="box_70b">
<p class="text_noindent gr"><a id="page_284"/>[<span class="bold">note</span>] Jobo processors automate the agitation process by giving the film constant agitation. For this reason, your Normal Development Times will be approximately 15 percent shorter when using these processors.</p>
</div>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Temperature.</span> After you establish a working temperature for your chemistry, make sure that you don’t stray from this standard by more than one degree.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Tank Versus Tray Development.</span> This advice applies to sheet film users only.</p>
<p class="text_indent">With the <span class="bold">tray method</span>, the individual sheets of film are agitated continuously by a hand in a tray of developer. Use a tray that is large enough to allow easy handling of the film. Trays with flat unchanneled bottoms aren’t recommended. This method uses less developer than the tank method, and because the agitation is constant, the processing times are shorter. Presoaking the film in a bath of 68-degree water will prevent the sheets from sticking together when you put them into the development bath. When the film is presoaked, you should add 30 seconds to the development time. Extreme care must be taken to avoid scratching the emulsion side of one piece of film with the corner of another. Also be careful not to touch a dry sheet of film with your wet fingers. The safest method for developing sheet film in a tray is as follows:
</p>
<ol>
<li>Fan the dry sheets so that they can be grasped individually.</li>
<li>Quickly immerse the film face up one shot at a time in the presoak bath to avoid trapping air bubbles against the emulsion.</li>
<li>When you move your film from the presoak bath to the developer, place each piece of film face down and keep the film from floating around.</li>
<li>To agitate, pull the bottom sheet out and move it to the top.</li>
<li>Keep repeating this process for the duration of the development time. Make sure that the sheets remain face down. This will protect the emulsion side of the film from being scratched.</li>
</ol>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<p class="text_indent">With the <span class="bold">tank method</span>, the sheets are first put into individual metal hangers and then are developed together in an upright tank. To agitate sheet film in a tank, use the following method:
</p>
<ol>
<li>At the beginning of your development, slowly lower the hangers together into the development tank.</li>
<li>Tap them sharply against the top of the tank to dislodge any air bubbles that may be on the surface of the film.</li>
<li>Lift the hangers out of the developer together and tilt them to the side until the excess developer has run back into the tank.</li>
<li>Re-immerse the film and repeat step 3, tilting the hangers in the opposite direction.</li>
<li>Repeat steps 3 and 4 for the first 15 seconds of every minute, following the agitation plan outlined above.</li>
</ol>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<p class="text_indent">Proper sheet-film agitation requires careful planning and precision. Before you attempt either tray or tank development, I suggest that you ask an experienced film processor to demonstrate how it’s done.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Whichever method you use, always use fresh developer and develop the same amount of film in your tank or tray when possible. The more film you process in a given amount of developer, the faster the developer will be exhausted.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>