<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_289"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appJ"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">J</span><br/> Film and Developer Commentary by Iris Davis</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">When we last ran our tests in 2006, the digital age was in full swing but film was still a viable and regular option for many, if not most, photographers. That is not the case now. Film is still readily available; however, it is hardly practical for most commercial applications.</p>
<p class="text_indent">We have always been a society enamored of instant gratification, and the digital age has made that possible in the world of photography as well as many other walks of life. What used to involve the coating of glass plates with photographic emulsion, much setup time of tripod and large format camera (for that’s all there was), watching existing light until it was “just right,” processing the plates in an onsite darkroom, drying, and then contact printing (on paper one had also coated with emulsion) can now take place, literally, in the blink of an eye.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Digital photography has also given photographers a degree of control over their own work that simply wasn’t available to most in the past. There really is nothing in the world like a good Cibachrome print, but honestly, how many of us ever had that capability? Now it is possible for just about anybody with a decent digital camera to capture an image and make their own acceptable print from their desktop printer. While we have gained much, I do have to wonder what we are losing.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Printing, in a darkroom, is a holistic experience. It involves mind, body, and all senses. The physical aspect of it is often overlooked until one has made a print where you’ve had to use your entire arm as a dodging tool on a 20×24 or even, for that matter, stood for 6 or 8 hours printing 8×10s. I feel that the act of putting one’s body into the making of the print, handling the fragile photographic paper in the womb-like atmosphere of the darkroom throughout the process of exposure, development, washing, etc., gives a photographer and/or printer a connection to the image that goes beyond that which they gain naturally from creating the image.</p>
<p class="text_indent">I will leave the argument of what is better, film or digital, silver or inkjet, to others. Myself, I’m touting the actual process. Ansel Adams said, “The negative is comparable to the composer’s score and the print to its performance. Each performance differs in subtle ways.” For me, that is <a id="page_290"/>what makes a darkroom-made print seem more handmade than a computer-generated one. No doubt, it is a personal bias; I also own a typewriter.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Any photo supply store worth its name still sells film, and there are photographers, oldtimers and those new to the art, who are finding the unique beauty of the medium. While there are fewer choices for film, paper, and chemicals, a number of manufacturers have shown a strong commitment to traditional photography. I use Ilford papers almost exclusively, and when I shoot, I usually shoot HP5+ in all formats—35mm to 4×5—and it comes in sizes up to 8×20, and yes, I mean inches.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Kodak no longer makes black-and-white silver-based photographic paper. I do like Kodak’s T-Max 400 film, and I use T-Max developer for a number of films I see in my lab, most notably the aforementioned T-Max 400. T-Max developer is also very good for pushing film. I use it to push HP5+ to ASA 1600 with quite good results. Kodak T-Max 100 is probably the most reliable mid-speed film on the market. I have never had decent results with FP4 from Ilford. I’ll admit I don’t branch out in recommending other film manufacturers. I have seen too many inconsistent results and haven’t done exhaustive tests on any other brands.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Photographer’s Formulary is a very good resource for uncommon chemicals, pre-made and make-your-own such as developers and toners. A priceless toning resource is Tim Rudman’s <span class="italic">The Photographer’s Toning Book</span>, which is aptly subtitled “The Definitive Guide.” Another resource without which I would be lost is the “Massive Development Chart” on <a href="http://digitaltruth.com">digitaltruth.com</a>. It is an amazing compilation of manufacturers’ recommendations for processing any film in any developer. I can say with a great degree of certainty: Using that chart, combined with Chris’s and my tests in this book, will get you well-developed negatives every time.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><span class="bold">Iris Davis</span>, with unique style and class, owns and operates a quality custom photo lab called Davis Black and White in Austin, Texas. She welcomes questions and comments through her website: <a href="http://www.davisblackandwhite.com/">www.davisblackandwhite.com/</a>.</p>
</body>
</html>