<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_291"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appK"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">K</span><br/> Alternative Methods for Extreme Expansion and Contraction Development</span></a></h1>
<div id="secappK_1">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appK_secappK_1"><span class="br1">Expansion</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">With modern films and developers, Expansions beyond N + 2 are difficult to achieve without a serious loss of image quality owing to increased grain and fog. In general, you should rely on higher than normal paper grades and/or negative intensification when extreme Expansion is required.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Intensification means processing the film through a special chemical bath with the intention of increasing the contrast of the negative after it has been developed and fixed. Ideally, intensification will add density to the highlight areas of the negative without greatly increasing grain. Photographer’s Formulary offers a prepared formula called Chromium Intensifier that requires you to bleach, intensify, and then redevelop your negative. This formula is effective, but a more simple method is to intensify the negative in a bath of selenium toner. To intensify negatives in selenium, do the following:
</p>
<ol>
<li>Presoak the negative in a bath of water for 5 to 10 minutes.</li>
<li>Refix in a bath of hypo without hardener for 5 minutes.</li>
<li>Tone in a bath of Kodak Rapid Selenium Toner diluted 1:3 with hypo clearing agent for 5 minutes. Agitate continuously.</li>
<li>Clear in hypo clear and wash.</li>
</ol>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<div id="box_72b">
<p class="text_noindent gr">[<span class="bold">note</span>] Selenium toner is highly toxic. You should perform this procedure in a well-ventilated area. Read the instructions carefully.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div id="secappK_2">
<p class="text_noindent"><a id="page_292"/></p>
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appK_secappK_2"><span class="br1">Contraction</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">A number of techniques are available when extreme Contraction is necessary to control the contrast of a very high contrast subject.</p>
<ol>
<li>You may have to use a lower than normal paper grade.</li>
<li>If used properly, a <span class="bold">compensating developer</span> will lower negative contrast while minimizing the loss of shadow detail.</li>
<li>The <span class="bold">Two-Bath</span> and <span class="bold">Water Bath</span> development techniques can sometimes be useful for extreme Contractions.</li>
</ol>
<p class="text_indent">All these processes are described in detail in succeeding appendixes.</p>
<p class="text_indent">It’s important to remember that there will always be some loss of shadow detail when Contractions beyond N – 2 are necessary. You can compensate for this by placing your Important Shadow Area on Zone III 1/2 or Zone IV when you are planning an extreme Contraction.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>