<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_293"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appL"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">L</span><br/> Contrast Control with Paper Grades</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">For historical and technical reasons, paper grade 2 (or multigrade filter 2) is usually considered Normal for negatives with Normal contrast. For example, this is the grade of paper I used as the standard for my testing procedure (see <a href="Ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>). This means that paper grade 2 would become the target of all of your Zone System negative contrast adjustments, and theoretically your negatives would print well on that grade.</p>
<p class="text_indent">On the other hand, it is possible to customize your Normal Development Time so that any grade of paper becomes Normal for you when you use a given film/developer combination. Experienced fine printers often do this because they have learned that a particular grade of paper best suits their aesthetic needs.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The general principles for adapting your Normal Development Time to fit a given grade of paper are discussed here.</p>
<p class="text_indent">When compared to a standard Normal Development Time on grade 2, the higher the grade of paper you choose as your personal Normal grade, the shorter your personal Normal Development Time will be with a given film/developer combination. The reason is that paper grades with more contrast (higher grade) require negatives with less contrast (a shorter Normal time).</p>
<p class="text_indent">Conversely, the lower the grade of paper you choose as your personal Normal grade, the longer your personal Normal Development Time will be for a given film/developer combination. The reason is that paper grades with less contrast (lower grade) require negatives with more contrast (longer Normal time).</p>
<p class="text_indent">Of course, there are practical limits to how far you can take this process, and the only way to know precisely how much shorter or longer your time should be is to carefully do a test like the one outlined in <a href="Ch08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>, page 88.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_294"/>After you’ve established your personal Normal grade of paper, and a corresponding personal Normal Development Time, it becomes possible to use paper grades that are higher or lower than this new Normal grade to achieve contrast control beyond the usual Expansion and Contraction methods described in this book: One grade higher than your Normal grade is roughly equivalent to the effect of N + 1; one grade lower than your Normal grade is roughly equivalent to the effect of N – 1.</p>
<div id="box_73b">
<p class="text_noindent gr">[<span class="bold">note</span>] The type of enlarger you use is also a factor in this process. The same negative will produce a print with approximately one grade more contrast when printed with a condenser enlarger than with a diffusion or cold-light enlarger (see <a href="appP.xhtml">Appendix P</a>).</p>
</div>
<p class="text_indent">My recommendations here are hedged because paper grade numbers aren’t strictly standardized among manufacturers. Printing the same negative on grade 3 of one brand of paper may give you the same contrast as grade 4 of another brand. This use of higher and lower paper grades can enhance the effect of Expansion and Contraction.</p>
<p class="text_indent">For example, if you are photographing a subject that you determine requires N + 3 development, which is beyond the range of normal Expansion techniques, you should give the negative N + 2 development and then print that negative on a grade of paper that is one grade higher than your personal Normal grade. This will result in a print that is approximately equivalent to N + 3.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Conversely, if you are photographing a subject that you determine requires N – 3 development, which is beyond the range of normal Contraction techniques, you should give the negative N – 2 development and then print that negative on a grade of paper that is one grade lower than your personal Normal grade. This will result in a print that is approximately equivalent to N – 3.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Careful testing is required to perfect this technique with your preferred materials. One reason that paper grade 2 or filter 2 is generally considered best for your Normal standard is that it’s in the middle of the range of contrast choices available with most papers. Standardizing your negatives to grade 2 will give you the widest number of choices above and below that grade for creative contrast control.</p>
</body>
</html>