<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_296"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appN"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">N</span><br/> Compensating Developers</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">Compensating developers are very dilute, slow-working developers that take advantage of the fact that denser areas of the negative (the highlights) exhaust developer at a faster rate than thinner areas. The reason is that the highlight areas contain more exposed silver.</p>
<p class="text_indent">As the film develops, residual byproducts (bromide ions) produced in the emulsion weaken the effect of the developer and slow the process. The function of agitation is to replace the weakened developer with fresh supplies. When the film is at rest between agitations in a compensating developer, the bromide ions build up at a much faster rate in the highlight densities of the emulsion than they do in the less dense shadow areas. This effect is exaggerated because a compensating developer is relatively dilute and therefore is less able to replace the exhausted developer saturated in the emulsion. This causes the highlights to increase in density at a much slower rate than the shadow areas. The shadows, in effect, are given a chance to increase in density, resulting in an overall decrease in contrast and better shadow detail.</p>
<div id="secappN_1">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appN_secappN_1"><span class="br1">Compensating Formulas</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">The following is a list of some popular compensating developers. (See <a href="appW.xhtml">Appendix W</a> for references to other developer formulas.) You should conduct your own tests with these developers to discover the correct times for your film.</p>
<div id="secappN_1_1">
<h3>Kodak HC110</h3>
<p class="text_noindent">HC110 functions as a compensating developer when it is diluted 1:30 (from stock not the syrup). Average Normal Development Time: 25 minutes.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_297"/>KODAK D-23</p>
<p class="text_indent">If you’re ambitious and have a decent scale for weighing chemistry, Kodak D-23 is a formula you can mix yourself. The ingredients are available from any chemical supply company or from Photographer’s Formulary (see <a href="appW.xhtml">Appendix W</a>). Follow the formula for D-23 carefully and mix the ingredients in the order given.</p>
<div class="table" id="table_20t">
<p class="table_caption"> Kodak D-23</p>
<table class="table_frame">
<thead>
<tr>
<td>WATER (125°F)</td>
<td>750 ML</td>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Metol</td>
<td>7.5 g</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Sodium sulfite</td>
<td>100 g</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Water to make</td>
<td>1000 ml</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<p class="text_indent">The working temperature of D-23 is 68 degrees.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div id="secappN_2">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appN_secappN_2"><span class="br1">Two-Bath Compensating Formula</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">The Two-Bath method was made popular by Ansel Adams for extreme Contractions. It utilizes Kodak’s D-23 formula listed above as part A, and the following formula as part B.</p>
<div class="table" id="table_21t">
<p class="table_caption"> Two-Bath Formula: Part B</p>
<table class="table_frame">
<thead>
<tr>
<td>WATER (125°F)</td>
<td>100 ML</td>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>Borax (granular)</td>
<td>20 g</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Water to make</td>
<td>1000 ml</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>
<p class="text_indent">The working temperature is 68 degrees.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The procedure for using this Two-Bath formula is as follows:
</p>
<ol>
<li>Agitate the film continuously for four minutes in part A (D-23).</li>
<li>Move your film to part B and let it rest there, without agitation, for three minutes.</li>
</ol>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<p class="text_indent">The result of the Two-Bath method should be contrast reduction equal to approximately N – 2. Two-Bath developer processes work because of the compensating effect described previously. A classic variation of this procedure is the water bath development process.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappN_3">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appN_secappN_3"><span class="br1">Water Bath Development</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">The water bath development technique was designed to dramatically reduce negative contrast with a minimal loss of shadow detail. It works best with sheet films because it assumes that there will be enough developer saturated into the shadow areas of the emulsion to allow them to continue developing after the highlight areas have exhausted their developer.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_298"/>It should be noted that, in an effort to improve sharpness and reduce grain, film manufacturers have reduced the thickness of most modern 35mm film emulsions to a point where water bath development no longer works as well as it once did with roll film.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The basic technique for water bath development is as follows:
</p>
<ol>
<li>Agitate your film in the developer bath continuously for 30 seconds.</li>
<li>Quickly transfer the film without draining it to a bath of water and let it sit without agitation for one minute.</li>
<li>Repeat these steps three times and then process, wash, and dry your film normally.</li>
</ol>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<p class="text_indent">Any standard developer will work with this process, but see the website:
</p>
<div class="quotes">
<p class="text_noindent">
<b>www.digitaltruth.com/products/formulary_tech/01–0190.pdf</b>
</p>
</div>
<p class="text_noindent"/>
<p class="text_indent">for information on the use of this technique with Amidol, one of the classic developers from the era of Edward Weston.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>