<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_303"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appR"><span class="br1">Appendix <span class="bold">R</span><br/> Filter Factors, the Reciprocity Effect, and Bellows Extension Factors</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">Filter factors, the reciprocity effect, and bellows extension factors greatly affect your exposure.</p>
<div id="secappR_1">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appR_secappR_1"><span class="br1">Filter Factors</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">Colored filters are useful for increasing the contrast between objects that are different colors. A filter will transmit its own color and absorb its complementary color. Thus, a red filter will lighten a red apple when used with black-and-white film and darken a blue sky. Filters can produce important effects, but you need to remember that the filter is blocking some of the light that would otherwise be exposing the film. Unless you compensate for this lost light, the negative will be underexposed. Every filter is associated with a number called a <span class="bold">“filter factor</span>.<span class="bold">”</span> This number indicates how much exposure to add for each filter. For example, if the factor for a given filter is 2, the exposure must be increased by two times to get the proper exposure. Because each f/stop doubles the exposure as it opens up, a filter factor of 2 requires opening up one stop. A filter factor of 4 would require a two-stop adjustment. Because daylight has a bluish cast and tungsten light is reddish, the filter factors for daylight are slightly higher. (The one exception is a dark blue filter, #47, which has a higher tungsten filter factor number.) Filter factors are listed in the Kodak data guides for filters and black-and-white films.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappR_2">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appR_secappR_2"><span class="br1">The Reciprocity Effect</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">Ordinarily, f/stops and shutter speeds have an equal effect on exposure. Changing the f/stop from f/8 to f/11 is equivalent to changing the shutter speed from 1/60 to 1/125 of a second. In either case, the exposure is one stop less. The reason is that f/stops and shutter speeds are calibrated to be equivalent, or “reciprocal.” Unfortunately, this is true only within a certain <a id="page_304"/>range of exposure times (camera shutter speeds). If your exposure is longer than 1/2 of a second or shorter than 1/1000 of a second, the reciprocity rule “fails.”</p>
<p class="text_indent">For example, a negative exposed for 1/2 of a second at f/2.8 will give lower densities than one exposed for 4 seconds at f/8. The film will be underexposed even though, according to your light meter, these two exposures should be the same. This is called <span class="bold">“reciprocity failure</span>.<span class="bold">”</span> Assuming that you need to use f/8 for depth of field, the solution would be to use an exposure of f/8 at 15–20 seconds. If this sounds imprecise, you will find that published reciprocity charts are very general. You also need to compensate for the increase in contrast that results from such long exposures. Ten to 30 percent less development will be required for negatives that have been exposed for longer than 1/2 of a second.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Because of their unique grain structure, Kodak TMax films require less compensation for the reciprocity effect than conventional films. As stated previously, with standard grain films, when your indicated exposure is 10 seconds, a 50-second exposure is required, with a 20 percent reduction in your development time to avoid underexposure and overdevelopment. With TMax, Kodak recommends an exposure of only 15 seconds for a 10-second indicated exposure with no reduction of your development time. Standard reciprocity failure charts apply to Ilford’s Delta films.</p>
<p class="text_indent">For more information on the reciprocity effect, consult <span class="italic">Kodak Professional Black-and-White Films</span> data book or <span class="italic">Basic Photographic Materials and Processes</span> published by Focal Press.</p>
</div>
<div id="secappR_3">
<h2><a href="content.xhtml#bck_appR_secappR_3"><span class="br1">Bellows Extension Factors</span></a></h2>
<p class="text_noindent">To focus on an object very close to the lens, you need to increase the distance between the lens and the film. This is important to know because if the film–lens distance becomes greater than the focal length of the lens, the f/stop numbers become inaccurate.</p>
<p class="text_indent">An interesting way to visualize why this happens is to imagine that you’re inside a large camera that is focused on an object approaching the lens. If the lens is set at f/11, as the lens gets farther away from the film, the size of aperture f/11 will appear to decrease. Eventually, f/11 will appear to be the size of f/22 from the film’s point of view. The rule is: As the lens-to-film distance increases, the effect of a given f/stop will decrease. Unless you compensate for this, the negative will be underexposed when you use extension tubes on a 35mm camera or extend the bellows of a view camera beyond the focal length of the lens.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The bellows extension factor tells you how much exposure to add to get good results when doing close-up photography. There is a mathematical formula that you can use to compute this factor, but an easier way to figure it out is to use one of the many handy devices that have been developed especially for this purpose. Two examples are the Quick Stick, manufactured by Visual Departures in New York, and the Calumet Exposure Calculator.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>