<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1><a id="page_xii"/><a id="page_xiii"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_preface"><span class="br1">Preface to the Sixth Edition</span></a></h1>
<p class="text_noindent">Less than a week ago, as I write these words, I received word that the Impossible Project had begun the full-scale revival of a photographic tradition that most of us were sure had been lost forever. It’s very interesting to consider what it means that Polaroid films and cameras are available again given how dominant digital processes have become in the world of photography. Ansel Adams was one of the earliest and strongest proponents of Polaroid instant processes so I know he would be pleased.</p>
<p class="text_indent">One implication of this development is that photography as a medium remains strongly diverse with professional fine art and commercial practitioners who need specialized tools and methods to do their work.</p>
<p class="text_indent">This also explains why the Zone System remains relevant in this overwhelmingly digital photographic world.</p>
<p class="text_indent">On the one hand there are many photographers who are working with film and chemistry because there are qualities about analog processes that they truly love. It’s one thing for older photographers to hold onto familiar ways of working. It’s quite another to meet young photo-artists who are choosing to shoot film because they have discovered a process (and a culture, really) that resonates with their individual forms of self-expression. More than anything else, these artists need to understand how film and exposure work. This edition is primarily for them.</p>
<p class="text_indent">It has also become clear over the years that digital methods are no replacement for really understanding how photographic exposure can function as a powerful creative tool. This is the essence of why the Zone System remains important.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Those of us who knew and worked with Ansel Adams know that he would most likely have been at the forefront of the digital revolution, just as he was when Polaroid materials became available. In fact, in 1980 he was quoted as saying, “I actually feel that in the next few years—it won’t be very long—the electronic image is really going to be the medium in photography.”</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_xiv"/>Some photographers who were reluctant to make the transition to digital methods—either because they instinctively disliked working with computers and monitors or because they love the process of darkroom printing—are now finding that it’s a necessity to make the change. For them, the question is how to make this transition in a way that is most compatible with their personal creative approaches.</p>
<p class="text_indent">One of the ironies of photography’s digital revolution is that many people assume that working with Adobe Photoshop and digital printers necessarily means leaving behind many of traditional photography’s fundamental methods, skills, and even some of its values.</p>
<p class="text_indent">And yet, the reason all of this matters is that the beauty and quality of digital prints can be astonishing! The first digital print I saw was created by Graham Nash’s company Nash Editions, and the combination of deep and rich saturated blacks on thick drawing paper made an impression on me that I will never forget.</p>
<p class="text_indent">But, inspired as I was by the quality of that image, I quickly discovered that it was produced with an Iris printer that cost more than $100,000, and even though inkjet printer prices are now far less, digital photography does require mastering a new vocabulary and new ways of working.</p>
<p class="text_indent">But, in a deeper sense, there is really nothing new in this process. In some ways, photography has become increasingly technical and complex; in others, it is much more simple and automatic than it has ever been.</p>
<p class="text_indent">It is hard to remember that there was once a time when photographers had to build their own cameras and formulate their own chemistry and papers from scratch. What always makes all of this effort and expense worthwhile is that, if we are willing to invest the time and energy to adapt to changing methodologies, we get to be photographers and participate in the magic that that entails!</p>
<p class="text_indent">And so, in the midst of all these promising but bewildering changes and choices facing contemporary photographers, what does the Zone System have to add that could be of value? And what about the Zone System’s reputation for being formidable and difficult to learn?</p>
<p class="text_indent">More than anything else, an artist has to be able to master technical and formal skills so that free expression can flow freely and without distraction. For example, dreaming, our most spontaneous form of creative expression, is effortless.</p>
<p class="text_indent">What makes the Zone System almost universally practical is that it is a visual and conceptual language that allows photographers to imagine and see and manipulate photographic tools in a seamless and straightforward way.</p>
<p class="text_indent">As you will learn in forthcoming chapters, the keys to this practicality are the different ways that the concept of the “Zone” is understood within the System.</p>
<p class="text_indent">A “Zone” is, all at once, something that you can see in the world, something you can visualize in a print, something you can measure with any light meter, and something you can dial into your camera with shutter speeds and apertures. Photography suddenly becomes a flexible creative process with end results that are predictable.</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_xv"/>Most think of the Zone System as being strictly related to film exposure and development. In fact, although this may sound grandiose, the Zone System can actually be a way of seeing the world with applications in every form of photography, including digital.</p>
<p class="text_indent">A good example of this is demonstrated in <a href="Ch011.xhtml">Chapter 11</a>, “The Zone System and Studio Lighting Photography,” where I explain the process of re-creating a classic tableau by Bill Brandt in a lighting studio. Unless you have a lot of experience or specialized training, the process of conceptualizing and executing complex studio lighting setups can be challenging. As you will learn, the language of the Zone System makes it possible to visualize the whole setup in terms of easy to identify “Zones,” specific tonal values that you can meter for and render.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The Zone System is powerful and flexible, and many experienced photographers have developed personal working methods that are essentially variations of the Zone System, sometimes without even realizing that this is true. (<a id="appV.xhtml">Appendix V</a> contains a number of examples of how the Zone System can be applied to a wide variety of different photographic approaches.)</p>
<p class="text_indent">Until Ansel Adams (in collaboration with Fred Archer) formulated the Zone System, a serious student had only two choices: either study sensitometry at a professional school or stumble along learning how to solve problems by trial and error. The Zone System has done away with all of that. But unfortunately, over the years, the Zone System has gained a reputation for being highly technical and a complex waste of time. Happily, this isn’t true.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The fact is that the Zone System can be very easy to learn and practical to use if it’s approached in the proper way.</p>
<p class="text_indent">After teaching hundreds of students, I can confidently say that if you have learned how to develop a roll of film or edit an image in Photoshop, you can learn to master the Zone System. To make this fact instantly clear to my students, I’ve made a routine of asking them who is most confused about photographic technique. I then take this person outside, and when we come back after no more than 2 minutes, that person is able to demonstrate, using a Phase One digital back, a mastery of exposure that never fails to amaze the rest of the class.</p>
<p class="text_indent">I’m able to do this by using an extreme form of the approach used in this book: I simply show how to use my modified spot meter without bothering to explain why it works the way it does.</p>
<p class="text_indent">An analogy could be made to learning how to drive a car. It could be argued that one should begin driving lessons by carefully explaining in detail how internal combustion engines work, what gear ratios mean to the transmission of mechanical energy from the pistons to the wheels, and so on. This is roughly equivalent to teaching students approaching the Zone System about logarithms, characteristic curves, and sensitometry.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The problem with this approach is that after you have finished explaining these subjects in detail, what have the students really learned? Have you really completely explained the processes involved? Are there not always ever more subtle and deeper questions of engineering and physics that you have glossed over because you have decided that they are not important? <a id="page_xvi"/>There will always be people who want to know more, and at some point all educators need to draw a line at what they think students need to know before sending them off to experiment on their own.</p>
<p class="text_indent">My approach to writing this book has been to avoid trying to explain all the science behind the Zone System. Instead, I teach all of its basic principles and the logic of how it applies to real life.</p>
<p class="text_indent">I realize that some will find this approach not rigorous enough, but after my years of teaching the Zone System to beginning students, my experience has been that once you understand enough to begin achieving consistently good results, the confidence you will gain from that accomplishment will carry you through the learning process to the level of skill you need for your work.</p>
<p class="text_indent">There are a number of excellent, more detailed technical books on the Zone System that should be read by those who favor a scientific approach to their work, and some of them are listed in <a id="appW.xhtml">Appendix W</a> under the section titled “Technical Resource Books.”</p>
<p class="text_indent">The second question this book addresses is: What information do you really need to be able to apply the Zone System to your own photographic problems?</p>
<p class="text_indent">The answers to this question are contained in <a id="Ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>, “Zone System Testing: Method 2.” Here, you will find the results of tests that a good friend and I conducted on many different films in a variety of different developers (see <a id="appI.xhtml">Appendix I</a> for a description of our testing method). These tests, which made use of all the major products, were conducted under actual shooting conditions. We then spent time field-testing these results in a working photo lab and with my students at the California College of the Arts to assure their accuracy. Appendices H and I contain comprehensive descriptions of the characteristics and uses of all these products.</p>
<p class="text_indent">My hope is that by updating and expanding this information, and adding discussion on subjects such as digital photography and studio lighting, I ensure this book remains a truly practical guide to the Zone System.</p>
<p class="text_indent">As you begin this text, keep in mind that the Zone System is not intended to be an end in itself, any more than is the study of medicine. Learning any new technique necessarily involves an ordering and restructuring of the way that you perceive the world. The beauty and the real value of the Zone System unfolds in the practice of actually using it to create meaningful images. The problem is trying to create with no system at all.</p>
<p class="text_indent">As you begin to use the Zone System, you will find yourself modifying and adapting it to best serve your own needs. As this happens, the Zone System will become less formal and more a natural part of your creative life.</p>
</body>
</html>