<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
<title>The Practical Zone System for Film and Digital Photography</title>
<link href="../styles/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/mathml.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../styles/feTable.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000004905400" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div id="sec_1">
<h1 class="br1"><a id="page_xviii"/><a id="page_xix"/><a href="content.xhtml#bck_sec_1"><span class="br1">Why and How to Read this Book</span></a></h1>
<div class="dq" id="box_1b">
<p class="box_title text_left"/>
<div class="quotes">
<p class="text_noindent italic">As long as I can earn enough to pay my taxes I’ll be happy. I’m not a professional photographer you know, I’m an amateur. “Amateur” is the French word for lover.</p>
<p class="attrib"><b>—Imogen Cunningham</b></p>
</div>
</div>
<p class="text_noindent">As you can imagine, one of the major challenges in writing a new edition of this book was how to accommodate the needs of photographers who are in the midst of the profound transition the world of photography is experiencing. Some photographers are interested in the Zone System because they fully intend to continue working with film and developers. Others may have learned that the Zone System is useful but are not sure how it applies to the digital world. And then there may be those who are committed photographers but have never shot or developed a roll of film and never intend to.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Ironically, many of those who are inclined to follow a “pure” approach to either digital or film photography eventually discover that the hybrid nature of the medium is hard to avoid. Film photographers who want publish their work need to at least understand the essentials of scanning.</p>
<p class="text_indent">But why would a purely digital photographer need to learn about film and the Zone System? The answer is that digital photographers who are looking for the highest possible quality for their work—let’s say they are trying to make huge digital prints with no loss of image quality—will discover that, unless they own or can rent a $44,000 high-end digital scanning back like the Phase One IQ260, the way to get the greatest number of high-quality pixels is still to shoot a film grain film and scan the result with a <a id="page_xx"/>Hasselblad Flextight X5 scanner. But, of course, unless the film is properly exposed and developed, the results will be very disappointing.</p>
<p class="text_indent">The exciting thing about the Zone System is that it has a lot to offer photographers in all of these categories. This is because, as mentioned in the Preface, the real power of the Zone System lies in the fact that it is a comprehensive visual language with a simple vocabulary of elements that apply to all photographic practices.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Still, the problem remains, how to draft a book that doesn’t bore or waste the time and attention of photographers who have specific needs?</p>
<p class="text_indent">Below is how this book addresses these issues.</p>
<p class="text_indent">First, as with the fifth edition, this edition is written throughout with an awareness of the dual nature of the photographic world.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Second, within each chapter, I have included clear headings for sections that apply only to one approach or the other. For example, in <a href="Ch02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a> that outlines the fundamental problems that the Zone System is designed to address, there are sections titled “Working with Paper Grades” and “Working with Problem Negatives” that are primarily for film photographers only.</p>
<p class="text_indent">But finally, and this is perhaps the most important thing for readers to understand, the ultimate goal of this book is to leave every reader with a clear and comprehensive understanding of how the Zone System functions as a versatile creative tool. I joke with my students that you will know that you have fully internalized the Zone System when you find yourself asking for your toast as “Zone IV.”</p>
<p class="text_indent">For this reason, although there are necessarily still sections devoted primarily to film and digital processes, I highly recommend that all serious photographers read through the book as if it were a narrative telling an important story.</p>
<p class="text_indent">Even if there are parts that are not immediately applicable to your practice, you will better understand the concepts by seeing how they apply from one area to another. Those who are familiar with Adobe Photoshop will note that many of the major image editing commands use wet darkroom tools as metaphors for how they function. “The Burning and Dodging” tools are just two examples.</p>
<p class="text_indent">If, on the other hand you are already completely familiar with the Zone System and simply want to know how it applies to your digital work, you should skip ahead to <a href="Ch010.xhtml">Chapter 10</a> “The Zone System and Digital Photography.”</p>
<p class="text_indent">For those who are just beginning photography, I’d suggest that you start by reading “A Primer on Basic Photography” in <a href="appG.xhtml">Appendix G</a> (page 264). The primer will acquaint you with most of the language of basic photography and will generally make it easier for you to understand some of the new concepts that you will learn.</p>
<p class="text_indent">One final question: How does all of this apply to the bewildering array of equipment choices available to photographers these days?</p>
<p class="text_indent"><a id="page_xxi"/>In this book what I have done is begin by outlining concepts and principles that are broad enough to include many different tools and applications. Then, rather than trying to explain how these concepts apply to every conceivable camera, film, and software choice available, what I do instead is lay out what I’ve learned about how to achieve fine results with the limited selection of materials and processes that I’ve mastered. What you’ll find is that these methods inevitably apply to many other tools and platforms but in specific ways you may have to figure out for yourself. This has always been true for photography, but even more so now that things are changing so fast.</p>
<p class="text_indent">My hope is that this book will make it easy for you to achieve your goals with either film or digital photography. Photography as a creative process is challenging enough without having to struggle with technical issues. Anything we can do to gain more control over this process is worth the effort and this is what the Zone System is all about.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>